130r

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f265.item.r=



p130r_1

Drying animals in an oven

One can skin small cats and remove their eyes and all their guts. Then place a small stick vertically between the teeth in order to open their mouths. Then with iron nails one should attach their feet to a small board, arrange the required position. Once they are tied by their feet with small iron rings, one has to hang them upside down into the sun. By doing so, they will get the right shape and dry, the belly will tighten and the the tail will remain high up thanks to the twist that you made. Once they are already a bit dry, one may twist the head as he wishes and secure the position with any tool. One may finish to dry the animal by placing it in an oven once the bread has been taken off. Then place some realistically painted lead balls or wax balls in the eye-sockets. One should paint them with gummed ink so that they look like jet. One can add a painted tongue, or horns, or wings or anything you may imagine, same goes for rats or any animal.

 



p130r_2

Reddening lively crayfish which will look as if they were boiled

Rub your crayfish with good vinegar diluted with a little eau-de-vie and not much, then you can present them as if they were cooked and yet they will walk.

 



p130r_3

Molding a single spider

One has to display it on the jacket of clay as it is said for the vine leaf. Then do the first cast. And once it dry, peel the mold off to the middle of the legs and do the second cast.



p130r_4

Molding a single vine leaf

Attach it with brass wire points on the jacket of clay and then cast the first mold. Once it is dry peel off the back side and make the second cast. Then peel away the back side, and make your second cast. Once it is dry, you may remove the leaf. You must heat your mold only once, because there is nothing to be burnt inside.



left-top



fig_p130r

https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5cHVsNnNVQ1l5RnM



which surround the fingers of the paws and which stick in the jacket of clay.

 



left-bottom

Also. One cannot mold the hairy legs of big spiders or any other hairy animal if they had not been rubbed with wheat oil before they are laid flat. This will make the hair firmer and will dry very quickly.  Hairy things entangle in the  sand, and do not burn very well.

130v 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f266.item.r=.zoom

p130v_1Molding a crab

It is a secret and a masterpiece to mold [a crab] well because it is necessary to proceed differently [than you would] with other animals, because its shell is quite difficult to [...] and that is why it is necessary to reheat the mold three or four times. And on top of all that, it leaves a hard crust [that is] gray like ash. It is not molded from one piece and one cast as [is done with] plants. Rather, [it is moulded] in two casts as [is done] with serpents which are easily stripped from it [the mold]. After it is opened, nimbly remove this crust with the very fine point of a pen-knife {and not with quicksilver which removes nothing from it} and likewise those small crusts of the second cast which get into the cavities that the sand or the molded animal made because it has curved legs. Here is the subtlety and the secret of stripping it. As you molded it [the crab] from the back side in the way [that you did for] the others [animals], remove the stomach and all the curved legs from it. Make your second cast in the way [that you did for] the other [animals], but as it will have set, take care that you not open the mold unless you have first reheated it well. Otherwise, because of its curved legs, you would break the whole thing. Herein lies the subtlety. If, after it has been well reheated and opened, you see that the crust is not burned enough, reheat [it] until it is burned [enough]. 

 

left-topIt [a crab] can be painted like a crayfish.

left-topIt does nothing.

left-bottomFor opening the mold, it is not necessary to soak it because, once reheated, it will open itself by itself.

p130v_2Stag beetle

Like a crab, it [a stag beetle] is also difficult to burn, therefore do [stag beetles] as you did crabs.

p130v_3For molding thinly

After you have molded the first mold as the core, leave it to dry well before removing the figure from wax, so that the mold is not ruined. Afterwards, then make make a small lasagna of paste as thick as you like, and, once you have greased the cavity of your first hollowed mold with butter, apply the paste to it [the cavity of the first concave mold] and then the upper part of the second mold. If you grease [the mold] with oil, it will be soaked up [into the mold] and it will not be as clean as butter.

131r 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f267.item.r=

p131r_1Herbs difficult to burn in the mold

Mold them in two or three castings; being annealed, your mold will open, and it will be easier to extract the charcoal from inside. 

left-topTry [this] 

 

p131r_2molded letter paper

Write with some ink well thickened with gum or any other color dye which has body, and which is not erased if dampened with brandy. Then put your paper on the sheet of clay, and dampen it with brandy. Cast both sides [of paper].

p131r_3Adorning beds, mirrors and similar things

Model any drawing in half relief on a flat slate in order to set it on round or flat things. Cast  with very fine tin, then you can gild it with gold leaf, and set it wherever you want. Fill the bottom of the relief with small rubies, orpiment, or any colored little grains.

 

p131r_4Training a dog 

You need to keep your dog attached; when it does what you command, to win its love, give it a piece of cheese which was held under the armpit. This cheese would be a bad drug if the master, or the apprentice, is red-haired. 

p131r_5Molded wax

Wax representations made from white lead and cerussite are not made to be burned and melted in a mold where you want to cast silver and gold; this would make it brittle. Moreover if you use such a mold, the wax would be stripped thanks to the violence of the fire which makes it boil, and the mixture made of cerrusite or any other metal would attack the mold. That's why if you want to sketch things

left-bottom

+White wax is more delicate than the other, and it doesn't leave any filth when you want to mold it as a core, or to mold hollow.



131v 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f268.item.r=





p131r_5

to be cast with gold and silver. Do not add to your wax all the drugs you are preparing, but only melted sulphur, as the candle melts, and also candle smoke. Melted sulphur falls down to the bottom of your mold, but lets the wax keeps some of its quality, melting it but leaving it a little firm. You can thus melt your wax representation on fire. If your wax is composed of cerussite or something similar, you need to put your mold into boiling water.

left-top You don't need all this to mold flat representations made of wax, because the wax can be removed completely from the mold, and won't remain inside it.

p131v_1When lead or tin casts fill with bubbles

 

If your casted work became porous, it can be repaired with very firm wax, and you can gild  or silver it afterwards. If you cast fine, the alloy of one ℥ of lead to one lb of tin is good. But if you cast with lead[ligue illegible], indeed you need one lb of lead to two ℥ of tin, because lead is fat and sticky, goes over the alloy. I have cast a very small lizard that way. If you cast something thick, which keep the heat for a long time, it will make bubble if there is not enough tin. Your mold should not be cold, but cool enough that you can hold it without burning your hand, or that you can hold your finger into the cast without burning yourself. Your tin or lead must be like red. Cast your lead first, then cast tin. When you are going to cast, add a piece of resin to your mixture, then a little looking-glass tin. If you add too much lead to your tin, the mixture wouldn't be fluid enough. To know [the right proportion], If tin cries loudly, it means that there is not too much lead; if tin cries softly, it means that you added too much lead. Be wary

left-middleYou can solder with the same matter, then rework it and [remove away all the unwanted thick parts] with a burin.

left-middle 

Tin is a metal that can[…], makes bubbles and burn, and more capricious to work with than gold and silver.

left-bottom 

Lead must not be only red, it must be quick, and as liquid as water, which is a sign of its perfect heat. Your mold must be so hot that you couldn't bear to put your finger into it. Do not open your mold until is has cooled down. Just as for silver and gold, it is a sign of good casting when lead comes out through the vent holes.



132r 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f269.item.r=





p131v_1

not to heat your mold too hot because it makes it brittle, it makes bubbles and shrinks tin, and would also break the molded thing. Do not dip you hot mold into water because tin and lead would shrink.

 

p132r_1Mold made from two casts

It opens once anealed. To clean it after, fix the clamps again, lute the mold, particularly the joints. Then let the earth slowly dry. When it doesn't smoke anymore, let the mold cool down until you can hold it without burning your skin. Then put your molds into the presses, or into a pot filled with sand, and cast with tin. If you cast gold or silver your mold needs to be cast twice, and cast when your mold becomes red-hot.

 

left-topIf your heated mold […], shrinks because of the bad quality of the plaster, open it after the first heating, tighten it, the lute it and clamp it again.

 

p132r_2How to anneal the molds

Light your charcoals from the forge, then place them in a line in a corner of the forge according to the size of your mold, in order that it be surrounded with 3 or 4 fingers of charcoals, particularly at the bottom of the mole, where it is thicker. Then put your molds on these charcoals -- and not on a grate as some people do -- because they would get too strong a heat. Let your furnace heat up gradually for a while, always adding burning charcoal. As long as the mold is humid, your charcoal will be dampened at the bottom, but when it is dry, the charcoals start to blaze. When one side of the mold is dry, turn over; when both sides are dry and don't smoke anymore, increase the heat and cover your mold with burning coals. When the mold starts being red, do not blow on it with small bellows, because the mold would burst. Similarly, when your mold becomes red-hot, keep it well covered with burning charcoals and do not uncover it because it would crack. Prevent the draft from a window from reaching it. Then let it cool down.

left-middleWhen you want to anneal your molds, luted or not, do mark the belly of your mold, in order to place that side at the bottom, against the burning charcoals, because if the intensity of the heat made the mold crack, it would be better that it do so on the bottom part instead of the top part.

 

left-bottomIf your mold is small, do not heat it as long, otherwise it would crack and be damaged.



132v 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f270.item.r=





p132r_2

dry by itself. When your mold starts to redden, it will soon be become completely red-hot. But make sure that its bottom is red-hot too, without any black spot.

p132v_1 Common quarry sand

In a frame, If you cast it hot, sand will bubble; thus you have to just dry it.

left-topI have tried to prevent molds blended with sand from cracking when annealed, and thus not get any with flaws that crack.

p132v_2Crocum ferry

After I processed it with vinegar and reddened under heat, I had it ground very finely on the porphyry, until there could be no ruggedness felt under the nails. Then I soaked it in very good vinegar for 2 or 3 days, stirring the mixture several times a day. Then I boiled it and made it red-hot in a pot, and put the whole thing into an air furnace. I obtained a mass full of eyes, but that crumbled finely between the fingers. I mixed half as much as stone alum in the sand. I diluted the sand very thinly, and molded a very small lizard, which molded very cleanly and finely. Crocum ferry does not make the mold harder, but makes it firmer. When your mold is soft and fat under your nail, it means that the crocum is good, very fine and well prepared. You can add any quantity of crocum, your mold will not be damaged because it is a friend of gold. I think it would be the same with silver. And in order that molds made with it do not crack, make it with needle filings.

 

left-topSand is better made with distilled vinegar.

left-middleYou can add this sand to the molds you want to use to cast silver, because it make molds firmer, and when you scratch it, you will find it a bit rougher than the other molds not made from this sand. You mold very clean with this sand.

left-bottomYou can use this one for all molds, because it prevents them from cracking and bursting when heated. This sand withstands several casts for molding flat medals. Sand from steel or needle filings is redder and better.

p132v_3Gilding animals casted with silver

You can gild them with an amalgam, the lines won't be damaged if they are made from silver.

133r

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f271.image



p133r_1

 

Hard wax to imprint seals

 

One makes these [seals] out of white wax which is harder than the other and one mixes in it some cerussite or leaded white very finely ground such that it is as hard as you like and mix in a drop of turpentine to bind it. Afterwards mix it in the color that you want. It is in wax that serves goldsmiths for modeling.





p133r_2

 

Casting the feet of small lizards in gold and silver

 

Because the feet of these [lizards] that are very small are [also] very fine, once you have molded the top and you have uncover the vents and underneath the feet are  covered lightly with wax, and then cast a second mold. And the wax that one removes, it leaves a little cast for these said feet, and again such that the underneath [part] comes out in one piece that you can repair well, And the scales on top of the toes come [out] well.

 



left-top

Around the big lizard nails, put on each a small round of wax to make the cast like this.

 



fig_p133r_1

https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5V2JZcWtNeEJmYWs

left-middle







p133r_3

 

Marks [made by] the [pin] points of iron thread which one finds on the head of an animal

 

With the points [or pins] with which you have dressed [your animal] all over, do same with the head, but [out of] the head which is pierced, a certain moisture seeps out around the wound and this little exudation prevents the sand from covering the point well and there always remain little pinpricks. But to avoid this, you can plant in the plaster of the said blunt pin point and around the upper part of the point, and over this point, there put a little hard wax or a little mastic or cement. And by the medium of the hot thread of iron there you can hold the throat of the animal which one removes [the iron] when you come to uncover the vents and the throat for doing the second cast.





p133r_4

 

Clamps and the broken mold

 

When you have done the first firing and taken off the clamps and you have opened your mold to clean it by taking off the bubbles with quicksilver which one cannot do with closed molds, reclose the mold and reattach the clamps but not in the same place as the first time. Reapply lute and dry it but if this is for casting silver or gold [use] lute with the rest of sand which has been used because this is the best netting. If your mold is broken in refiring you can augment it with clamps and lute.



left-bottom

X





 

 133v

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f272.image



p133v_1

 Porosity and little holes which are in the mold



It oftens happens when you cast two or three molds one after the other using the same dish, because the last casting comes from the bottom of the dish and is thicker, and then often the last cast which comes from the bottom and which is the thickest of the dish, may easily become porous. Cast thinner and neater, as long as you blow very strongly on the soaked sand while casting in order to clear the little air bubbles.

 



left-top

When the sand is casted thick, it often becomes porous







p133v_2

Thing that cannot be released from the mold



You must cut it inside the mold in order to burn it. Cut it with scissors at once, that way blood doesn't flow on the mold, and doesn't make dirty. Because this dirt would be removed with difficulty when reheated. Then place your mold into a furnace, or  something similar, in order to quickly dry the mold which must be removed before the forming of crusts or molds.@ 

 



left-middle

+

When you mold small lizards, and when you want to peel away the first molded part, start to peel away the heads, you will know its place thanks to the needle.

Don't peel away the legs before peeling away the entire body, to avoid that the naked body, moving,doesn't remove the legs from their place, which would not be easy to put back into place. When you remove the small needles fixing the legs, block the legs or press the legs with something, that way while removing the needles the legs won't move; finally, you can fix the legs again with wax.





p133v_3

Various animals entwined



You can entwine a snake with a lizard, each one biting the other, or a snake eating a frog, or a wall lizard or something similar. But since these interlacings cannot be stripped, cut what's possible, and allow the rest to burn. To make the mouth of the snake, which must stand high, hold a wall lizard, which is small and would need to be held in the air, because the snake's head is higher, put under the wall lizard a mound of earth suitable to support it.  And if you place the mold in a furnace, the animal drying quickly, it will quickly shrink, then it will burn more easily. These interlacings are also made to mask wounds or defects on the animal which happen when we catch them. Do not forget to join with wax, applied carefully with a hot iron wire, all the parts of the animal which are one on top of the other, or those which are not well pressed on the slab of clay, so that the soaked sand does not remove them. Do that in order to 



134r

p133v_3

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f273.image





p133v_3



avoid putting pins that should not be put, only on the top of the head, the thickest parts of the body, and on the delicate parts like the middle of the lizard's feet, the nails of which you will drive into the clay, thus they won't move. Once your first mold is casted, peel away the belly of the animal, but do not forget to put some tenuous little pieces of wax at the tip of the lizard's feet. But if it is from a wall lizard, lightly cover all the sole of its feet with wax, which will be removed with the second cast. A cavity is left which will be fill these little fingers with metal. then rework it. Make  sure that wax is fixed well on the parts of the animal which are one on top of the other, so that the soaked sand which comes in does not make them move. If that happened your jacket of clay would be spoiled and your mold wouldn't get the right thickness, would have holes, and would be spoiled. To obviate that you can make a thicker mold. If this occurs you could rework it in this fashion.





p134r_1

To repair a pierced mold

	

If the molded animal pulls of in certain places, moves from the place you had fixed it, or has not completely died, or if you didn't fix it well with the iron pins or with the melted wax, or if the animal hasn't the right thickness on the outside at the relief, or if it is pierced, instead of removing the animal from the mold, peel away the weak parts, or the pierced part, and make holes all around these parts, then dip the back side of the mold, quickly cast onto this place with the same soaked sand which will go into the holes, the cast will adhere to the first cast. But you will have to lute this spot afterwards.





p134r_2

  

Sand made of crocum [ferri]

	

You can use the mixture made of crocum ferri to cast silver or gold, this mixture will make these casts firm, and prevent these from cracking and making burrs. And I believe that for flat things, it would withstand severa casts. Which however is not commonly done for gold and silver.

 

	

left-bottom

Try crocum ferri for lead and tin.

134v

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f274.image



p134v_1



To make gold fluid 



Put as much verdigris as sal ammoniac, as much borax as saltpeter. But don't add a greater quantity of borax and saltpeter than half the quantity of verdegris and sal ammoniac, in fact add as much borax and saltpetre all together as verdigris. Grind into powder the ingredients on the marble slab, then grind again with very good vinegar until it is very fine, like a ground color, grind verdigris with oil, then leave to dry if you have time, if you haven't so much time dry it with the fire of the forge, make so that it is very dry.



left-top

Grind

 



left-top

One of the principal things for casting is to cast very hot, especially large metals





p134v_2



Casting big works with gold



Not only should one clamp the mold very well, but also strengthen it with good iron wire links or adequate straps.

 



left-middle

Before casting with gold, clean thoroughly your forge with lead and tin.





p134v_3

Secret for soldering small works made of gold and silver



If some little pieces of legs cannot be easily removed from gold or silver casting, it is because you didn't cast wax under these parts. Beat some soldering gold very finely, then cut it into very fine flakes, cut the quantity you need. Take some of this phlegm or white and thick saliva which is on the teeth, put some of this matter to the place you want to solder with the point of a burin, then place your flakes, then put to the opposite part a mixture made of a small quantity of soaked fat earthand saliva, thanks to the mixture the solder will better adhere. Then pulverize a bit of borax on it, and heat up Quince pulp seed water to a boil and others too.

135r 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f275.item.r=

p135r_1Colors for gold, or sauce



Take as much verdigris as sal ammoniac, &amp; saltpetre the size of a bean. Because if you put in too much, it would make the whole thing boil so much that it would all pour out. Saltpeter is only put in to make it boil, so that you know when the material has boiled enough. This color put on sour melted gold makes it soft instantly.

left-topSoftening gold



p135r_2Casting



It must be lengthened out with respect to the thing you have molded. And at a minimum for large molds it must be four or five fingers in length. You can make it large enough for half the mold &amp; then divide it in three points of such a sort, and so the molded things will [each] be small. But your points must be small. And in the middle of the casting &amp; of its points, make some holes to impede the fury of the metal &amp; make it run more softly. It is also necessary to fix the bent parts of the animal with little notched lines, and similarly the end of the tail and other fine parts so that the metal goes throughout &amp; flows from one part to the other.



Do not forget to make a wax cast of the paws of [illeg] &amp; things as subtle as this.



left-top

When you have molded an animal in the first part of the mold, do not let this part dry out before you have removed the said animal, because when the mold dries out it will shrink and it will also make the animal shrink. Keep it therefore in a damp &amp; humid place until you have done it. 



fig_p135r_1

https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5U3BqOGxwTHNPeVk

left-middle



left-middle

Vine leaf is painted with a green made of scudegrun &amp; verd de terre.

p135r_3Vine leaf and small frog



To mold, take vine leaves as they are blooming, just as with all herbs &amp; flowers, or a young vine regrowing after it has been cut or when the leaves come off in autumn, because new leaves are knottier &amp; have more evident veins. By contrast, old leaves are smooth all the way through &amp; full of holes in many places. Place therefore your leaf, its back behind it against the clay plaster, and fasten it with little pins. Leave it nevertheless with its natural curling. And make a notch in the clay to hide the stem for the first cast.  And when it's done and dry, take out the stem of the leaf and clean it well with your jacket and press it with a little scoop of clay. Afterwards, make many castings around the leaf with wax, as you know well, &amp; make a slender casting &amp; with many lines &amp; knots.

 

left-bottom

You can cast a spider or frog &amp; whatever you like on the leaf.

135v 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f276.item.r=

p135v_a1Casting gold

Take a crusol that can contain a certain amount, as you wish to place roughly crushed borax into it. Place [the borax] at the bottom and then the gold on top of it. Arrange the coal in the forge in such a way that the wind of the bellow will blow above the crusol and no on its side as it would cool it down and would not heat it enough. Also, make sure it is three good fingers away from the wall of the forge so that it is quite surrounded by coal. Allow the crusol to anneal until it is quite red. Then, have your boy strongly blow the bellow with long pushes, as in this manner it heats it better. Meanwhile, once the gold will be melted, blow a small bellow above it. Because [otherwise] the gold would turn sour and would acquire some kind of coat. As long as there will be some swirling smoke as you blow this way, it means that it is not soft enough for the cast. Therefore, uncover the melting pot and without displacing it and without stopping the bellow, tilt it towards you so you may well see what is inside. Throw a ferue of borax in it and blow wind towards it with the small bellow in a jerky fashion. Should there be coal inside, blow a bit stronger to make them come out. And if the gold still smokes and swirls, add borax again and blow above it. Beware that it is still sour and not soft enough, it will show a coat when you blow it as if it had cooled down. By contrast, if it does not show this sign, it is soft enough. Then, blow strongly so that it [the gold] is quite heated and once you think it is hot enough, throw colour on top of it in the crusol and the colour should be composed as following: verdigris, saltpeter, sal ammoniac, and a bit of borax. And continue blowing with the small bellows, and the gold will turn shiny like

left-topIf you cast in gold some piece of important [dimensions], lute your mold with the same sand or put crocum on it.

 

left-topIf you wish to cast some large work, or of important [dimensions], create at the bottom or at an extremity of the forge a  vented furnace where you may hold your mold in the sand so red.

 

left-middleOne may cast two or three pounds of gold.



136r 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f277.item.r=





p135v_1

[FROM PREVIOUS PAGE: And continue blowing with the small bellows, and the gold will turn shiny like] a mirror. And once you will want to [start] casting, put a bit more colour in and let it rest a little, still blowing wind with both the small and the large bellows. Finally, place your mold quite red between the small molds or in a crusol full of sand quite hot and [start] casting. And once it will have stuck, you may, if you wish, throw it into water as gold does not get damaged like tin which breaks.

To melt gold bullion, there is no need to blow above [the crusol] with the small bellow.

 

For large works, the crusol made of sand has to be placed in a wind oven so that it is all red at the end of the furnace.

 

Gold, when exposed to wind or when forged becomes black. But a bit of aqua forte removes [the black] instantly.

If you have to forge a work made of gold on brass, as is done on small statues, put a lead sheet between the gold and the brass, and rather than anneal it and put it back in the fire, dip it in the aqua forte and it will be soft.

It is enough for the cast to be of the same thickness as the medal, that it from the middle of the cast, up to the medal. But if the medal is very thick, one should not thicken the cast as a result, because a thick cast never comes out well. It may be done large to embrace the medal as much as possible.

p136r_1Enamelling thin works

Goldsmiths polish the gold leaf using a burin and then they apply the enamel onto it.

136v

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f278.image



p136v_1

 

latten casting



Take latten from skillet pans, used to make baby's cereal, which is doulx and apt for the cast. Some people say that counter from Germany contain a lot of calamine. However, when they are tempered, calamine evaporates, calamine mixed with melted latten always evaporates, because latten becomes red again, thanks to the reiteration of melting. However, fresh calamine and only fresh calamine, which is blended with remelted latten, makes latten run, and allow a clean cast. Because calamine which is added to remelted latten is half-damaged compared with its natural state. This half-damaged calamine make latten porous and agitated because it has a tendency to evaporate. Thus add only very fresh calamine to melted latten. Make sure to cast your mold very hot, you mold must become red-hot, like molds to cast gold, silver, copper and metal. If you pour fresh calamine, avoid its smoke which is pernicious. To cast a medal, I took thirty counters from Germany and xii clous de rosette made of doulx latton, like for claires medals which are made of soft latten. This matter contains a lot of calamine like all kind of yellow latten, and make a lot of smoke which prevent latten from running, and make it porous, that is why it is necessary to make many vents and to cast very hot, latten must be as white as water, or as melted silver or as a polished mirror of steel. The second fusion will come out much better because evaporated calamine does not make as much smoke. If you use a molding frame that does not break and holds its own, the second [casting] will come more neatly out of the mold, because the frame is impregnated with the smoke of calamine. If you add sal ammoniac to your latten, this latten will be clear and shiny, but will be even more shiny with huile tingente. Do not use another sand than the above mentioned to mold a noyau, and the mold must become red-hot, like a mold to cast gold. Make a lot of vents. If you cast yellow latten with the prepared tutty you will not get any smoke.

  



left-top

This metal is capricious to cast because of the smoke of the calamine. Do not leave it out of the fire, as some do with silver. Because when air or wind touch it, the mold gets cold at once. When you cast it, this metal always leaves burrs, like when casting glass. Foundry workers do not usually use this very yellow latten as much because of the calamine which is heated. They cast red copper and turn it yellow with fresh calamine, or with some prepared tutty. Before casting, clean it with charcoal with a quere made of copper or iron. Then cover it with a cloth soaked in lard blended with saltpeter, or sal ammoniac, in order to protect it from wind, which would cool it down.



 

 137r

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f279.image



p137r_1

  

Casting red copper

Pure cauldron red copper, or copper of any other small works, is good to cast. To make it runny, add some sal ammoniac to it, and when you are about to cast, add a little bit of fine tin. One must cast the copper very hot into the mold, so that it is burning and very red, like gold, silver, latten, and metal. You will know that it is hot enough when it is clear and shining like a newly polished steel mirror, or like melted silver. Protect it from wind so that it doesn't cool down too soon. Cover your cast with tow in order to prevent it from cooling down. Red copper is cleaner than latten, which smokes a lot, which prevents the metal from running. I have moulded it as a noyau very neatly, and as thin as a piece of paper. It must be very hot, white and shining like melted silver, or a mirror. I have moulded it as a noyau with the same sand mentioned above.



left-top

It takes more time to melt copper and latten than any other metals, even red copper. It will run and will comes out well if you cast it very hot, and as thin as water.



left-top

Remove your mold from the fire, and set it into embers, which should fill a pot or vessel.

 



p137r_2

Huile tingente to make metal runny

Take some mercury, some real sublimate of Venice, and not sublimate of arsenic, aes ustum a poix, sal ammoniac, a poix. Ground everything separately, then blend them together in a glass bottle, and put it on warm ashes. You will see that everything melts like wax, and will have bright colors. Leave to set, add a small quantity of this mixture on every metal, it will run marvelously.



left-middle

Foundry workers who make large casts to mold statues, clean the dirt from these molds with calamine, and a lot of sal ammoniac in order to make moulds clear and neat. When they want to cast they add a lot of tin. Dampness and cold could spoil their works, that is the reason why even a small source of water in the hole can damage the whole thing.





p137r_3

Clamps

To make clamps use flat tongs made from wire, which is reheated and bent, and  hammered on anvil. Since those clamps are thinner, they burn more easily, being used in reheated molds. So use new clamps.



fig_p137r_1

https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5aG5XMHdYTTYzbzA

left-bottom

 

137v 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f280.image

p137v_a1Wetting sand to mold flat medals

Flat medals, made of wax or metal, must be oiled very lightly and then touched with a brush of spirits.  So that the already moistened mold takes well the oiled thing without rejecting it, one warms the water well in order to wet the sand, because with cold water it would be rejected.  It is necessary to oil medals, because they do not expand and in this way would break the mold. Animals, which expand, do not need oiling. The hot water much be of such a heat that you cannot keep your figure in it without it becoming too warm. Wet the thickest sand for flat and solid medals rather than [for] lizards and finer things. Once your sand has set, clean and scrape your mold on one side and the other, and on the bottom edge of the thrown side of the medal, make a notch so that it is easier to take out.  Lower the mold, scraping what surrounds the medal, so that on all sides you can take it out easily without it damaging the mold.  Then make some gashes around the first mold used to throw so that the second time that you throw in it, it will be identical to the first one, and in the same way, make a notch at the bottom of the mold, where the held of the item cast lies. Also make some [gashes] in the sides of the cast. This done, wet the back of the first mold in oiled water, and after the second casting moisten it with warm water if you have molded your medal in a noyau mold.  Having done the first cast, and this one having set, cut around the edge of the medal with the point of a knife so that it comes out of the throw and is not buried in it.  Then having made the second cast, and having opened your mold, take away the medal in one go, with two knife points, one on the side of the cast object and one on the side of the head, which is at the opposite end.

left-middleTake care not to oil your medal too much because if the seeps out, it prevents the sand from serving its purpose and coming together and renders it wavy and lumpy. You must only touch the middle of the medal with the tip of your oil brush and then smear the oil everywhere.

 

left-bottom

Make especially sure that the throw is as wide as you can on the medal and holds it together well. The gate of your cast must always be big and always narrowing as you go towards the medal. Also do not forget to notch the gate of your cast.



138r 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f281.image





p137v_a1

If you want to cast gold, silver, copper or brass, it is necessary that they be perfectly red, and fired on the inside when you cast, and perfectly reheated twice, if there is something inside to be burnt and cleaned.

  

The molds of animals that you burn must be reheated in such a manner that the animal burns up.  But if it has big bones, it is frustrating to take out and ☿ often breaks delicate things because of its heaviness. One does not put ☿in molds that can open.  It is often molds for flowers that do not open because they are cast in one go.

 

When you want to reheat your molds, fix cramp-irons on the joints, so that when they reheat they will not bend, contract or break. This is done once the cast is made.

 

The scrapings of the mold can also be used instead of bricks after being reheated, and also the leftover bits of the mold that have already been used. You can also pat it over important things, like works in gold or silver. You can also reheat it and blend it with water diluted with sal ammoniac, like spar from Germany, and is excellent sand for box molds for all metals.

 

The molds with things that need to be burnt out inside them, those ones will not open until the thing that is inside is burnt, like the molds for crayfish, crab, great-horned beetles. Do not open the molds in which you will burn something, not before the thing is burnt, it could be crayfishes, crabs, stag beetles, pictures, and pieces of wax and black sulphur, which do not come out of the mold [easily].

 

You must not mold on brick or wood because they absorb and attract water too early, and do not allow the sand to set. The best place for [the sand] is on a fresh layers of clay.  And yet, I have experienced that grey earth dries out the mold too quickly. Yellow [earth] is better.

 

left-middleFor medals, and flat things, the sand must be quite thick and moistened so that it sets quickly. And when the sand is thusly thick, you can shake and move the table where you mold lies, so that [the movement] makes the sand go everywhere. But when the sand is clear, as for flowers and herbs, you cannot shake it, nor can you do it when there is something attached to wax or other things which are prone to come off, such as the legs of crayfish or other similar things. And if by chance your sand is too thick, you must quickly add some water. And having put the sand in the water, examine it until it is thick on the bottom and clear on top.  The clearest is thrown in immediately and then bubbles and the thickest is thrown in at the end so that it strengthens the mold.

138v 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f282.item.r=

p138v_1Talcum mixed with the molds

I used the one from which I had extracted the oil. I crushed it very finely even more into a steel mortar with a pestle [which was] rough like a file. I crushed it very finely into a cottony, downy powder. I mixed it with the sand and soaked both matters together, and I casted it en noyau. It molded very clean and there is no doubt that it will withstand fire.

  

p138v_2Gold casted very thinly

When goldsmiths have to solder something quickly but don't have enough time to forge it, they melt gold and then they pour it on a cloth or on anything else that withstands fire. Then they flatten it swiftly with a hammer or another similar tool, and it [the gold] is very tenuous and it even retains the impression of the cloth.

 

Unalloyed pure gold can be cast into a medal but not into herbs and lizards or other very delicate things if it is not alloyed.

A pansy which is oiled with wheat oil can be cast with alloyed gold.

And other fruit leaves, but with branch[es] that are not large and especially the leaves, once cast, can be soldered.

 

p138v_3Imitation diamonds set into the work

Spread a fine layer of imprinting black wax on the inside of the  frame then coat it inside with wheat oil, then dust it with lamp smoke because this color should not be lustrous for fake stones. Having done this, set your stone with a piece of wax then, with a steel point, or a small finishing hammer, join the edge of the frame with the stone, so that light cannot get in but be careful not to hit the stone, which would break.

139r 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f283.image

p139r_1Casting with lead and tin

The way I have done it for lizards and serpents is with two ℥ of pure tin for one lb. of unrefined lead that is impure. The mold is made out of the aforementioned sand, common for all metals, when it is reheated, leave it to cool until you can put your finger in it without causing a breach in the gate of the cast. As for the lead, it is melted in a crucible with a bellows' fire until both the crucible and the lead are red.  When it gets to that state, cleanse it anew with charcoal or with a specially made scraper or with the pufts of the little bellows. This done, leave it to rest in it red state and you can even reheat it, then if you want, throw in a bit of resin to burn away the filth.  However, some think it best not to put any in because it leaves filth.  But when they are ready to cast, they cannot forget to also thrown in a bean-size quantity of bismuth for each pound of lead. And it must be as red as the melted metal when it enters the mold.  If the mold is large, it is much better to put in in a press so that they join well and so that the lead does not come out of the mold.  However, should this happen, and that for the first, second or third time your mold does not fill up, cast heartily because for as long as your metal is red it will mix and join with the other one and will come out very neatly like the main one.  The same thing can be said for pure tin used for thin things.  And that way for doing pure tin is one ℥  of new lead for one lb. of the former.  Large molds must be put in a press held tightly between two layers of copper, and then bury the whole thing in sand, which is better than ashes, because being heavy, it will seal better.  Otherwise large molds are prone to open because the metal is heavy.  Some make square molds

 

left-topWhen the metal is thick, you do not need to cast as hot as when it is thin.

 

 

topWhen you melt this often, it becomes sour and fragile because it has to be cast very hot and it makes it half-calicanated.  Use new stuff.

left-top+

left-topNote that If you want to cast with cuttlefish bone, they cannot be too warm because that would burn the cuttefish. For this effect, try paper. It it becomes brown, it is enough, and it is good for casting, but if it blackens the paper, then it is too hot.

left-bottomIf you want to cast paper with writing on it, make a mixture with half lead and half tin. As soon as it is melted, throw it between two pieces of cardboard on a flat place that is level. And with a point or gold or hard wood, engrave on the left the writing that you want. And having poured the lead onto the cardboard, press onto it the other piece of cardboard.



139v 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f284.image





p139r_1

 are made of earth or blades of copper, or iron, or wood covered with white iron, in order to bury more easily these aforementioned molds between the thin sheets of copper, estric or one of iron.

p139v_1Casting wax to mold an animal that one has not got

Take some white wax which is much more appropriate for this kind of work than anything else, because it is much firmer and does not leave as much filth, as much as you need to cast the animal that you propose, and no more. And [take] a half quantity of ground coal and neatly sieved through a cloth or coal sleeve, using it to give some color to your wax, that would otherwise be transparent and you will not be able to see your lines as clearly.  Put your wax on the coal fire to melt. And when it is well-melted and well-liquified, have, for a full eared-porringer of melted wax, as much sulphur as a large walnut.  Pulverize it.  Melt it over a slow fire and when it is melted, do not leave it on the fire because it will become too hard. But take it off and keep stirring it with a little stick and when it has finished bubbling and is as liquified as water, cast it into the wax that you will have previously removed from the fire.  And mix and stir both of the them so that they join together.  After stir in little by little while continuously mixing, the charcoal that has been repeatedly ground, and in this way it will be very well incorporated.  This is how you will know that your wax has gone beyond its ideal heating point, it will release no more smoke, it will start to have lines appearing on the side and not in the middle, and those lines will be close to each other.  If you cast too hot, you will not be able to separate your wax from your mold and it would stick to the cast.  When it is at the right state, stir it with a little stick so that the pulverized charcoal is well mixed in and has not fallen to the bottom of the mixture.  And in this way, throw it in  your mold bit by bit and not in one go, because wax is not runny



left-topThis black sulphured wax is for fashioning round figures that do not come out of the mold. And they need to be burned in the moule au noyau rather than be opened like the ones that have something jutting out or an intertwining of legs and arms. And this wax, thanks to the sulphur, will melt with little heat and leave without leaving any filth.  If by some misfortune the crushed charcoal remains in ashes, when you open the mold and blow on it, it will come clean.

left-bottomTo make wax serpents or other things to affix to candles, it is necessary to cast them with esbaucher wax of all colors.

140r 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f285.image

 





p139v_a1

not like other things. And for this one, you can cast two or three times until your mold is full. Now, concerning this mold of pulverized white plaster &amp; reheated in the manner of the sand from the preceding recipes, you should have made it long ago because it is used many times. But, before using it, soak it for a good hour in cold water, &amp; at a minimum, at least as long in hot water that at first is so hot that you can't hold your finger in it. And note that it absorbs no more, but that it appears very wet overall without water seeping into it. In removing it closed from the hot water, cast your wax in such a state of heat as has been described. And neither the first nor the second casting will readily come out well, hardly, until the mold is soaked. Let it cool down before opening it so that the cast thing not break. You will know that the casting is good when the wax coming back out of the mold is thin and even. Remember to make several castings along the whole length of the mold so that in this way the wax runs better.

Make the first 



fig_p140r_1

https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5NFdsdU4tVFgxOTg

 casting twice as large as other molds. And if, in the first casting, your work fills with bubbles and in so doing does not come out neatly, it's all the same, because you have to face the fact that the three or four first do not readily come out well. Firstly, you will know whether there are a few barbs that keep it from stripping well. And you will remove them if, on their own, they do not remove themselves in the two or three first castings. And the more that you cast, the more you will do it neatly. And your mold will serve you more than one hundred times if it Is well governed. But it is good to soak it one night or one day before casting so that it be well soaked. The same must be done for fruits made from sugar. This wax is very soft &amp; friendly &amp; pliant, like copper. And if it is hard [this is] because of sulfur, which makes it melt more easily than than other [wax], so much that you can see evidence on a hot slate. And the sulfur that you put inside will be found the second time that you melt it, [as] cracks on the bottom. Having in this way passed through wax, it will not catch fire at all when put to a candle. And in this case, I believe that it will cast quite the medal [illegible]. One uses the same wax in place of varnish to [illegible].

left-middleWhen your animal is cast, cut away the froth &amp; superfluous things with a hot pen knife. And if you want, plait and wrap it around some stick or candle, put it in some hot water to soften and hold it in turning it around.

left-middleLower the protrusions of the castings so that they be even &amp; that the wax has more silver so that it can run all in one go without turning through the windings of the snake.



140v 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f286.item.r=





p139v_1

  

to engrave on silver &amp; copper with aqua fortis. With this [wax] too, one fills the cavity of a relief, &amp; then casts in this cavity, with moistened sand, which immediately takes the relief very neatly. And then you can cast its cavity on it in copper, gold, and silver, and make really singular seals.

left-topSeals

p140v_1To cast in sulfur



To cast neatly in sulfur, arrange the pith of bread under the brazier, as you know. Mold whatever you want into it &amp; let it dry &amp; you will have very neat work.

left-top 

Try sulfur passed through melted wax, because it will no longer ignite &amp; and make eyelets.

p140v_2Molding and shrinking a large shape



Mold it with the pith of bread just out of the oven, or like that aforementioned, &amp; in drying out it will shrink &amp; consequently so will the medal that you will cast. By these means - lengthening out or enlarging the imprinted bread - you can vary the shape &amp; from one face  make several different ones. The bread straight from the oven is best. And the one which has been heated twice contracts more. You can cast sulfur without letting the imprint on the bread dry, if you want to cast it as large as it is. But, if you want to let it shrink, let it dry to a greater or lesser extent.

 

p140v_3Casting of lead and tin in plaster



If you want to cast any flat medal or any animal that is not very heavy, and that must not be burnt inside the mold, you can indeed cast in mixed  plaster &amp; brique, as above; and not in plaster alone, because it contracts too much feeling an ardent fire if it is not so mixed. But, with the brick, it holds well. However, take heed to dry out your mold at length &amp; on a slow fire &amp; with patience, because there is no need to reheat it. But when your work is of flowers or other things that want their mold to be reheated &amp; set ablaze, mix the plaster with stone alum &amp; even with crocum. I have molded in very neat plaster &amp; brick &amp; it has sustained several castings.

 

left-middle

I tried both plaster &amp; brick alone and molded en noyau with like the others. My mold was very clean, having lightly oiled &amp; rubbed my medal with spirits. I made my casting wide at the entrance, narrowing it as it goes along until it reaches the medal which is very thin. I notched the casting which embraced the medal well. I dried the mold out well on a slow fire &amp; finally, I heated it well without turning it red. I let it cool in such a way that I could hold my finger to it without burning myself. I made a line of 4 ℥ of tin, &amp; ix deniers of lead. I cast it red, and it was quite good and beautiful. Afterwards I put xii deniers of leadon top of 4 ℥ of tin. It is very good &amp; beautiful.

left-bottom

When there is nothing to burn in the mold, it is not necessary to reheat it for lead and tin. But for flowers and other things that must be burned, it is.

141r

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f287.image

 



p141r_1

Casting a crayfish

 

Thecrayfish is one of the most fantastical to cast, but also provides an example for casting other difficult things. You can distinguish males and female by the eggs that the females carry, and by the four little white back legs that males have in their tails after behind main eight legs. It is good to dry them out a bit so that the bumps come out more hard and beautiful, because none of what is made of shell shrinks.  It is true that should you dry the little inside legs for too long, they become diminished and have no body.  If they are too dry, the flesh separates from the scales.  Be sure then to maintain the mean.  They have certain hairs between the legs and at the end of the tail.  And because all hair is difficult to cast, because it gets mixed up in the sand and does not release, you can burn it by putting a hot iron on the crayfish so that it the hair cannot be seen.  As for animals that have hair or feathers, you must grease the hair with wheat oil, which is very dry and which will make the hair lay flat and straight.  In this way, you will have form of your animal and you will have the hair.  Should it the hair be wavy, it can be repaired. If your crayfish has eggs, which are delicate, and which will be difficult to take out of the mold without breaking, you would do better to make the first cast  with the crayfish on its belly and eggs. In this way, you will open the mold with it the crayfish on its back, which will be hard and easy to manipulate.  And the belly and the eggs will remain in the mold. And rather than opening your mold for the second time, you will have to burn it with them in it. This way, it will open easily, and what has been burned will come away cleanly. In this way, the second casting, which is done on the first one that has successfully taken hold, separates easily from the first, after having been refired. This is a singular secret for similar moldings.

left-topThe casting is made by the very thin tail.

 

topIf some little thing is missing, you can reattach it or else fill it with goldsmith's cement.

 

left-topDo not forget to rub with spirits before you mold.

left-topStag beetles, crayfish and crabs are molded in the same way.

left-middleIf your crayfish has no eggs, mold the back on top and the belly on the bottom. You can give it some.

left-middleIt the crayfish can be molded hollow for the body, but not for the legs. And for a good result, take note that the crayfish is rather fantastical to mold hollow, this ought to be reserved for turtles.

left-bottomWhen you open your mold, you will find the crayfish has white bones, but they will not be powder. And without opening it, the mercury will not have affected the process.    

bottomApply very light oil colors.

 

bottomTo paint it, boil it with wine and a bit of salt so that they become very red and use this as a model.  Paint the back with vermillion mixed with laquer, and the sides and the underside of the belly and the legs with vermillion and yellow ochre and white.



141v

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f288.image





p141r_1

Let your crayfish dry a little in the sun, by itself. If it has spawns, they will shrink while drying, and be all the more beautiful for it. Make your paste out of yellow potter's earth, just like for the other representations.  Lay your crayfish on it, the back side down, and the other parts which are more tricky to mold -- legs, belly, eggs - side up. Drive in the back side in the clay paste up to the legs, which is about the half part of the crayfish's body. Fix the body with a pointy iron thread in the middle and, if you feel you need it, you can also drive another one at the edge of the tail.  And in order that the big legs be lower than the head, which is lower because it is linked from below, add a little clay under the head. Then add a bit of clay under the jacket in order to raise it. Hide the feelers under the clay and under the crusher claws, then arrange it as you like. Stretch out the walking legs to the joints, and for the first cast, bend the second part of the walking legs. Fix the joints of the legs with wax and a warm wire so they will not move. If you want to mould something fancier, fix the end of one walking legs on the body or on a crusher claw , using the same wax. If the female has spawns, bent half the tail over the spawns, and keep the shape by fixing the tail with a wire. Be sure that you will be able to clean this part. Finally rub your crayfish with spirits, and cast your sand. Once the sand is hardened, uncover the back side, the head, the eyes, and the small legs close to the crusher claws, and the walking legs all along. One must uncover these parts as much as possible. Then bend and cover the spawns again. The other animals

 

left-topFix what may raise the two padded edges on each side of the mouth with melted wax under them.



fig_p141v_1

https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5R0NIbHoyNTNQRlk

left-top



 

left-middleUncover as many parts as possible, but be sure the channels you make are well stripped.

 

left-middleIncline your mould to the thickest side of the animal.

 

left-bottomTo paint the crayfish, one paints the middle of the back with vermilion, mixed with a bit of lacquer. The sides, the belly, and below the legs with a mixture made of vermilion, ceruse, and a bit of yellow ochre. As with all things, always keep the real one in front of you in order to copy it as realistically as possible.

 

left-bottomLay the feelers on the crusher claws, or solder this part with a wire made of bleached brass.

bottomWhen you arrange the legs, be sure that they do not get over the belly, and that they are well set against the belly otherwise [illegible]



142r

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f289.image





p141r_1

are not so uncovered. But since crayfish are troublesome to burn &amp; clean, you have to uncover them as much as you can, even the little legs just until the tips, because they are troublesome &amp; if, in order to not alter them, you have to take them out, you could break something of the mold. Having uncovered it with the point of a knife, like an engraving stick or another fitting thing, clean off the sand at the joints &amp; elsewhere with your little brush really very scrupulously. And if something is loosed from the crayfish, attach it with wax, as is discussed. And also attach the horns this way. And also do the casting the length of the extremes of the little legs with wax. And refill the holes that have been made with the needles of iron wire with it. And everything being quite clean &amp; having uncovered more than half of it, oil your mold after having soaked the back side in water, &amp; do not forget to oil all the fine parts that are between the legs and the little beaks; then rub the crayfish with spirits. And do your second casting after having made the first mold even, so that the cramp-irons join better. Your mold must be larger on the side with the impression than on the back. Do not open your mold after the second casting, so that it not become clayed &amp; reheated &amp; that which is inside not be burned. Do not forget to mix crocum throughout your sand when you mold the crayfish, because you must really reheat it &amp; the crocum withstands this marvelously. To mold a crab &amp; to mold a crayfish are exactly the same. When you have uncovered your crayfish on one side do not delay at all before doing the second casting, because crayfish dry out. It is not enough to uncover the crayfish such that you see the whole half the half you uncover, but take heed that your mold, even when you are uncovering, be good and stripped, because if the crayfish gets well burnt, you will not be able to open your mold without breaking it.

  

topRestore it with a pen knife, little chisels, or engraving sticks.

left-topAs you see here, but a wax casting all around &amp; at the end of the tail, where you will do the principal casting, two or three more.



fig_p142r_1

https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5Qkh2MDhvUkFnUW8

left-middle



 

left-middleMake the casting with candle wax shaped in a thread like a large packthread, the whole length from the end of the claws to the extremity of the tail. If there is also some claw end or other part that is extended past the rank of the others or is raised up higher or turned up all alone, make a wax casting for it from its end just barely not joined to the body or to one of the large claws or to some other place where lots of metal will be wedged in.

left-bottomHaving uncovered it, attach &amp; secure the two little bearded horns of the crayfish, and anything else that is not secured, with wax.

142v

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f290.image



p142v_1

Molding grasshoppers and things too thin

 

If you have to mold a piece of written-on paper that is too thin, after you have done the first cast and it has set, give a little thickness to the reverse of your paper with melted butter, which is the most appropriate means there is, &amp; for strengthening the wings of either a butterfly or a grasshopper, or any delicate part of an animal to which you need to give thickness. But take heed to apply this melted butter under the wing or in whichever place it will not be seen.  For giving thickness to a pansy or other flowers, butter is not good, but rather wheat oil, which is soon dry &amp; holds firm.  Wax would not be appropriate here for it is too hot once melted, and it makes the thing to which it is applied contract.  But butter is amiable and handleable.

 

left-topIf you write on paper or on common carton and your letters are made with gum, the moisture of the clay plate (?) or the wet (?) sand for a noyau will moisten your letters and undo them.  Write therefore with cinnabar mixed with oil, on oiled &amp; stamped (?) paper.

left-middle+Reheat your molds with charcoal firstly lit in the forge, so that the fire is not too hot and does not break the molds.  And do not fire as strongly where the mold is thin as where it is thick.





p142v_2

Molds

Make some notches in them the molds that enter more into the inside of the mold than the outside because in this way, they have more strength.  Take care to keep from reheating them suddenly in a burning hot fire, because this will make them break.

right-middleDo not keep them molds in a humid place, nor an enclosed place if they are not well dry, because they will mold.  The same with dried animals.

left-middleIt is not at all necessary to reheat the molds two times when the animal can pull away without burning, as do toads, which can very well be molded hollow like all thick animals. However, it is always good to redden the mold once.





p142v_3

Lute for luting your molds

I have not found a lute that is made more quickly than this one, nor a better one. Take some of the lean earth that artillery founders and bell founders use to make their trusseaulx and molds, which is lean and sandy.  Soak it moderately like a very thick mortar. Mix into it about one half of horse manure and then beat it well.  Afterwards mix in one third of cloth waste or cloth shavings and beat it again quite strongly.  You can reheat your mold as soon as the lute is ready.

143r

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f291.image



p143r_1

Moulding turtles and tortoises

The turtle the one that lives in water is more beautiful to mold because it has prettier scales and straight legs.  And the tortoises have crooked ones. They eat a lot. To get ready to kill them, open their mouth and pass a long penknife through all the intestines. And then make it swallow some vinegar mixed with spirits or urine, as one does for snakes. It is necessary to mould them in several pieces, and even the back sometimes because the sides of certain ones are narrower than others and in this instance do not release from the cast.  To make them die, you must not boil them, because they come apart, even the shell, in the hot water.  They the shells come out better when hollowed because their great thickness spoils the mold. Turtles are more lively. The tortoises are leaner, slower, and more sleepy.  If you scratch turtles on their shells, no matter how sleepy they are, they move; tortoises do not.

 

left-topThey turtles/tortoises die rather quickly in vinegar mixed with a little spirits or urine, as with all other animals.

left-topThey turtles/tortoises keep their eyes closed in the winter, and appear as dead, having been numbed by the cold.  They hide in the earth or under balls of grain or warm manure, and survive only on the dampness of the earth.

 

left-middleYou must not mold them too soon after they die because they are still stiff.  But on the day after, you will be able to manipulate them and bend their legs as you wish.





p143r_2

Moulders from Foix

Those who mould from across the way make their sand from crocum ferri and calcinated slate, but slate always retains its bumpiness and swells because it is a fatty. In the noyau, it is not good; in sand, it can be put to use.  They the moulders from Foix sieve their sand, grind it on porphyry, and soak it in water, and they keep the finest bits which are on the top, then they reheat it.

 



p143r_3

Toad

Having been molded, you can take it out it without burning it, because it releases easilyfrom the mold.  Choose the biggest and the lumpiest toads.  Because they contain a lot of metal, it is best to mold them hollow, since they turn out better.  You could make your cast in one great piece, but it would be troublesome to cut.  It is best to do it in three or 4 parts, which will be thicker close to the animal, and include the most amount of edge that is close to the cast/mold.  Make as well some casting conduits all the way from the end of the cast.

left-bottom



fig_p143r_1

https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9-oNrvWdlO5cnJFVXFaRURaY3c



Let the mold cool rather than opening it, even for thick things.



143v

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10500001g/f292.image





p143r_3

from one leg to another, so that the spread out limbs are in connection with one another due to the aforesaid casting conduits, which you will start in the waxless round parts that you have put at the edge of the legs to attract the metal.  In this way, because you are casting in wax, there is no danger chipping any part of the molded animal.  It's quicker to make the wax casting conduits thus, because in this way you can cast the second mold after the first, rather than wait to do them the conduits after the mold has been recooked, because then, if possible, you will need to have everything ready.  You need to heat well, and even redden the molds where there are wax conduits so that they melt and leave nothing inside.

 



p143v_1

Openwork carcanets

You can mold them "en noyau" like crayfish, first with one side being made higher with clay, which is hollow, and then you open it from the other side and make the second casting.  You can just as well cast them "en chassis", provided that they release well. If they do not, you can do a rough cast in wax, or you can fill up the cavities which do not release well with wax or clay.

 



p143v_2

 

Iron filings 

Because usually filings are mixed with impurities, it is good to heat them over fire to burn the filth and then wash them in clear water. In this way, the dirt will rise to the top of the water, which you will throw out, and the good filings will go at the bottom.



p143v_3

Carnations

Because those that you usually cast are generally quite big, they are heavy.  And so for these, you make them with silver leaf or slivers.